>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JUNE 25: PRESIDENT
TRUMP FACES A TEST IN THE U.S.
SENATE AS REPUBLICANS TRY TO
GATHER ENOUGH VOTES FOR THEIR
HEALTH CARE PLAN.
AND, HOW CLIMATE CHANGE HAS LEFT
ONE PACIFIC ISLAND NATION
STRUGGLING FOR FRESH WATER.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT TRUMP IS PUSHING THE
SENATE TO PASS ITS BILL TO
REPLACE OBAMACARE, AND PUSHING
BACK ON FORMER PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
HANDLING OF RUSSIAN MEDDLING IN
LAST YEAR'S ELECTION.
THOUGH MISTER TRUMP HAS PLAYED
DOWN THE RUSSIA PROBE FOR
MONTHS, IN AN INTERVIEW
BROADCAST TODAY, HE CRITICIZED
HIS PREDECESSOR FOR DOING TOO
LITTLE ABOUT THE HACKING OF
DEMOCRATIC PARTY AND CLINTON
CAMPAIGN EMAILS, AND ATTEMPTED
HACKS OF STATE ELECTION
DATABASES.
>> THE C.I.A. GAVE HIM
INFORMATION ON RUSSIA A LONG
TIME BEFORE THE ELECTION, AND I
HARDLY SEE IT.
IT'S AN AMAZING THING.
TO ME, THE QUESTION IS IF HE HAD
THE INFORMATION, WHY DIDN'T HE
DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT?
HE SHOULD'VE DONE SOMETHING
ABOUT IT.
>> Sreenivasan: IN RETALIATION,
PRESIDENT OBAMA EXPELLED 35
RUSSIAN DIPLOMATIC PERSONNEL,
SEIZED TWO RUSSIAN PROPERTIES IN
THE U.S., AND IMPOSED ECONOMIC
SANCTIONS ON RUSSIA-- AFTER THE
ELECTION.
TODAY, TRUMP ADVISER KELLYANNE
CONWAY SAID MISTER OBAMA COULD
HAVE DONE MORE SOONER.
>> I HAVE A QUESTION FOR THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION, WHY DID
YOU, "CHOKE," IN THE NAME OF ONE
OF THEIR SENIOR ADMINISTRATION
OFFICIALS?
WHY DID YOU DO NOTHING?
WHY DIDN'T YOU INFORM CANDIDATE
TRUMP?
I KNOW YOU THOUGHT HILLARY WOULD
WIN, BUT HOW COULD YOU NOT
REVEAL IMPORTANT INFORMATION
ABOUT RUSSIA HACKING?
>> Sreenivasan: AGREEING WITH
HER ON THAT POINT TODAY WAS THE
LEADING DEMOCRAT ON THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES INTELLIGENCE
COMMITTEE, ADAM SCHIFF.
>> GIVEN THE SERIOUSNESS OF
THIS. THEY NEEDED TO CALL OUT
RUSSIA EARLIER AND NEEDED TO ACT
TO DETER RUSSIA EARLIER, AND
THAT WAS A SERIOUS MISTAKE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE SENATE IS
EXPECTED TO VOTE THIS WEEK ON
THE REPUBLICAN'S PROPOSAL TO
REPLACE PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT, WHICH HAS
ADDED MORE THAN 20 MILLION
AMERICANS TO THE INSURANCE
ROLLS.
TODAY, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
SECRETARY TOM PRICE SAID
ELIMINATING ITS MANDATE-- TO
ACQUIRE INSURANCE OR PAY FINES
IF YOU DON'T-- WILL SAVE
TAXPAYERS MONEY.
>> 28-MILLION AMERICANS WHO
DON'T HAVE INSURANCE. 6.5-
MILLION OF THEM HAVE BEEN FORCED
TO PAY $3 BILLION IN TAXES AND
PENALTIES FOR THE PRIVILEGE, FOR
THE RIGHT OF NOT PURCHASING WHAT
THE GOVERNMENT SAYS THEY'VE GOT
TO BUY.
>> Sreenivasan: DOCTOR RAND PAUL
IS ONE OF FIVE REPUBLICAN
SENATORS PUBLICLY OPPOSED TO THE
BILL, DEPRIVING HIS PARTY OF A
MAJORITY OF VOTES.
TODAY, HE SAID IT PRESERVES TOO
MANY EXPENSIVE OBAMACARE
PROVISIONS, LIKE SUBSIDIES TO
BUY INSURANCE AND ESSENTIAL
BENEFIT REQUIREMENTS.
>> LOOK, I'VE BEEN IN MEDICINE
20 YEARS.
I'M 54-YEARS-OLD.
PREMIUMS HAVE NEVER GONE DOWN.
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO GO DOWN
AFTER THE REPUBLICAN BILL.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY, VERMONT
SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS SAID
WHILE DEDUCTIBLES AND CO-
PAYMENTS ARE TOO HIGH UNDER
OBAMACARE, THE REPUBLICAN BILL
WILL CAUSE MILLIONS OF AMERICANS
TO LOSE INSURANCE.
>> WHEN YOU THROW 23 MILLION OFF
INSURANCE, PEOPLE WITH CANCER,
PEOPLE WITH HEART DISEASE,
PEOPLE WITH DIABETES, THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE WILL DIE.
I WISH I DIDN'T HAVE TO SAY IT.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE
ANALYSIS OF THE HEALTH CARE
DEBATE, "NEWSHOUR WEEKEND"
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JEFF
GREENFIELD JOINS US FROM SANTA
BARBARA, CALIFORNIA.
JEFF, HERE WE ARE, A SIXTH
OF THE U.S. ECONOMY DEPENDS ON
HEALTHCARE AND WE HAVE A PIECE
OF LEGISLATION THAT COULD BE
DECIDED BY MAYBE TWO, THREE
VOTES.
IT'S COMING DOWN TO THIS.
>> IT'S REMARKABLE.
IN THE OLD DAYS, BIG SOCIAL
LEGISLATION LIKE SOCIAL SECURITY
AND MEDICARE USED TO PASS BY
OVERWHELMING MARGINS.
BUT FOR THE LAST 25 YEARS, WE'VE
SEEN THIS DOWN TO THE WIRE KIND
OF SITUATION.
CLINTON GO THIS TAX BILL
THROUGH WITH A ONE OR TWO VOTE
MARGIN.
PRESIDENT GEORGE W BUSH GOT HIS
PRESCRIPTION DRUG PLAN THROUGH
THE HOUSE WITH ONE VOTE TO
SPARE.
OBAMA'S STIMULUS AND HIS
HEALTHCARE BILL NEEDED 60 VOTES
IN THE SENATE TO OVERCOME A
FILIBUSTER.
THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT HE GOT.
SO THAT'S WHAT HAS HAPPENED AND
THAT REFLECTS, I THINK, IN PART
POLITICAL POLARIZATION.
BUT THERE'S ALSO SOMETHING TO
REMEMBER-- ALL THOSE BILLS
PASSED BECAUSE MEMBERS OF THE
PRESIDENT'S PARTY IN CONGRESS
ARE VERY RELUCTANT TO SEE THE
PRESIDENT FAIL.
>> Sreenivasan: WHOSE IDEA OF
PARTY VERSUS COUNTRY AND WHAT
YOU SHOULD PUT FIRST, HOW DOES
IT PLAY OUT IN THIS VOTE?
>> I THINK YOU CAN SEE IT
DRAMATICALLY WITH SENATOR DEAN
HELLER OF NEVADA, WHO IS THE
MOST ENDANGERED REPUBLICAN
SENATOR NEXT YEAR IN THE
MIDTERMS.
WITH THE PRODDING OF THE
REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR, HE SAID
HE'S NO ON THIS BILL BECAUSE OF
MEDICAID.
SO WHAT'S HAPPENING?
A PRO TRUMP PAC IS GOING TO
LAUNCH A SEVEN-FIGURE MEDIA BUY
AGAINST HIM, AND WHAT HAPPENS
NOW IS FOR HIM AND FOR THE
OTHER REPUBLICANS WHO EXPRESSED
RELUCTANCE, WHAT IT COMES DOWN
TO IS MITCH MCCONNELL LOOKING
FOR WAYS TO PACIFY THEM WITH
CONCESSIONS AT THE LAST MINUTE.
AND THE PROBLEM, OF COURSE,
IS THAT ANY TIME YOU CONCEDE TO
THE MODERATES, THE CONSERVATIVES
DON'T LIKE IT AND VICE VERSA.
>> Sreenivasan: FROM POLITICS
TO POLICY, WHEN YOU LOOK INTO
THE MEAT OF IT, THE HOUSE
VERSION OR SENATE VERSION, HUGE
CONSTITUENCIES THAT ARE GOING
TO BE HURT BY IT-- THE POOR, THE
ELDERLY.
WHO WINS GOING FORWARD OR IS
THIS JUST A CALCULATION OF
FIGURING OUT THE BARE MINIMUM TO
GET IT OVER THE LINE?
>> I THINK WHAT EVERY
INDEPENDENT ANALYSIS SAYS THIS
IS A BIG DISTRIBUTION AWAY FROM
MIDDLE CLASS AND THE POOR
TOWARD THE AFFLUENT, WHO GOT
HIT IN THE OBAMA PLAN BECAUSE
THEIR TAXES WERE INCREASED TO
PAY FOR SUBSIDIES.
TWO THINGS TO REMEMBER.
FIRST, THE TAX CUTS KICK IN
IMMEDIATELY.
THE BITES WITH MEDICAID
EXPANSION AND REDUCED SUBSIDIES
AND HIGHER PREMIUMS DON'T BEGIN
TO KICK IN UNTIL AFTER THE 2018
MIDTERMS.
THAT'S A VERY CRITICAL POINT.
THE SECOND THING I'D SAY IS THAT
FOR A LOT OF THE REPUBLICAN
BASE, REPEALING OBAMACARE,
WHATEVER THAT MEANS, HAS BECOME
THE BE ALL AND THE END ALL.
LIKE VINCE LOMBARDI ONCE SAID,
WINNING ISN'T EVERYTHING, IT'S
THE ONLY THING.
ANYTHING THEY CAN CALL OBAMA
REPEAL THEY WANT BECAUSE NOT TO
DO IT BETRAYS THE CENTRAL
PROMISE THEY MADE TO THE
REPUBLICAN BASE.
>> Sreenivasan: SHIFTING GEARS,
THE PRESIDENT BACK ON TWITTER
IN A COUPLE OF TWEETS HE SEEMS
TO ACKNOWLEDGE THE RUSSIAN
INTERFERENCE IN THE CONTEXT OF
BLAMING THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
FOR NOT DOING ANYTHING ABOUT IT,
WHICH IS A DIFFERENT TACTIC
THAN WHAT THE WHITE HOUSE AND
ADMINISTRATION AND PRESIDENT
TRUMP HAS BEEN PUSHING FOR THE
PAST FEW MONTHS.
>> FOR MONTHS, DONALD TRUMP WAS
SAYING THERE IS NOTHING TO THE
STORY OF HACKING.
MAYBE IT'S THE CHINESE, MAYBE
IT'S SOME GUY IN HIS PARENTS'
BASEMENT.
NOW HE'S SAYING OF COURSE THERE
WAS HACKING AND THE REASON THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION DIDN'T
TALK ABOUT IT WAS TO HELP
HILLARY BY NOT TALKING ABOUT IT.
THAT MAKES NO SENSE.
HAD THEY EXPOSED RUSSIAN EFFORT
TO PUSH THE ELECTORATE AWAY FROM
HILLARY, THAT WOULD'VE HELPED
HER POLITICALLY AND ONE OF THE
REASONS THEY DIDN'T DO IT, HAD
THEY RAISED THAT ISSUE, THEY
WOULD HAVE BEEN ACCUSED OF
POLITICIZING THE STORY IN AN
EFFORT TO HELP HILLARY CLINTON.
I THINK IT'S AN ILLUSTRATION
ALSO MORE BROADLY OF HOW TRUMP
USES SOCIAL MEDIA TO CONVINCE
HIS MILLIONS OF FOLLOWERS THAT
HIS VERSION OF REALITY IS RIGHT
AND, BY DEFINITION, ANYONE
PUSHING BACK AGAINST THAT STORY
IS A PRODUCT OF FAKE NEWS AND I
THINK THAT'S BECOME A THEME OF
THIS ADMINISTRATION, THERE'S NO
REASON TO THINK IT'S GOING TO
STOP.
>> Sreenivasan: JEFF GREENFIELD
JOINING US FROM CALIFORNIA.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THE U.S.
MILITARY SAID THURSDAY IT
CARRIED OUT AN AIR-STRIKE IN
YEMEN THAT KILLED THE LEADER OF
AL QAEDA IN THE ARABIAN
PENINSULA.
THE ATTACK IS A REMINDER OF THE
ONGOING U.S. COUNTER-TERRORISM
OPERATIONS THERE IN COORDINATION
WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF YEMEN AND
ALLIES LIKE SAUDI ARABIA AND THE
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES.
AT THE SAME TIME, AN "ASSOCIATED
PRESS" INVESTIGATION HAS FOUND
HUNDREDS OF MEN CAPTURED IN THE
HUNT FOR AL-QAEDA MILITANTS IN
YEMEN HAVE BEEN DETAINED IN
YEMENI AND U.A.E.-RUN PRISONS,
WHERE THERE ARE ALLEGATIONS OF
HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES AND TORTURE.
A.P. REPORTER MAGGIE MICHAEL
WROTE THE STORY AND SHE JOINS ME
NOW VIA SKYPE FROM CAIRO.
TELL US WHAT'S HAPPENING IN
THESE PRISONS?
>> Reporter: THE PRISONS ARE
INSIDE DIFFERENT PLACES LIKE
VILLAS, MILITARY CAMPS, PORTS,
AIRPORTS, AND DEPENDING ON THE
LOCATION OF THE PRISON, THE
CONDITIONS ARE DIFFERENT.
SO IN ONE CITY, FOR EXAMPLE,
THERE'S A BIG DETENTION CENTER
SET UP INSIDE THE AIRPORT WHERE
PRISONERS ARE HELD INSIDE
SHIPPING CONTAINERS.
PEOPLE ARE BLINDFOLDED MOST OF
THE TIME.
THEY HAVE ACCESS TO TOILETS FOR
THREE MINUTES A DAY.
THERE IS TORTURE EVERY DAY AT
NIGHT FROM 11:00 P.M.
WHEN OFFICERS AND SOLDIERS, THEY
ENTER THE CELLS AND START
FLOGGING AND BEATING DETAINEES
AND THEY SELECT A NUMBER OF THEM
AND DRAG THEM OUTSIDE THE CELL
FOR MORE TORTURE.
THAT ALSO INCLUDES SEXUAL
ASSAULTS ACCORDING TO DETAINEES.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU DESCRIBED
SOMETHING IN HERE THAT LOOKS
STRAIGHT OUT OF A MEDIEVAL
STORY.
A GRILL, WHAT IS THIS?
>> SOLDIERS TIED AT KNEES
AND SPUN THEM QUICKLY AND FASTLY
UNTIL THEY VOMIT AT THE VERY
END.
THIS IS WHAT THEY DESCRIBED
TO ME.
WHAT I WAS TOLD ALSO THAT DAY,
THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE SEVERELY
TORTURED LIKE SELECTED, LIKE
THEY SELECT SMALL NUMBER OF
THEM.
SO THEY BECOME LIKE A MODEL
FOR THE REST OF THE PRISONERS.
SO WHENEVER THE TIME FOR THE
INTERROGATIONS COME, THE PEOPLE
THEY HAVE ALREADY SEEN WHAT'S
HAPPENED TO THE COLLEAGUES, TO
THE INMATES, SO THEY START TO
JUST GIVE WHATEVER CONFESSIONS
THEY ARE ORDERED TO GIVE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHO PROFITS
FROM THE CONFESSIONS?
WHAT'S THE RELATIONSHIP TO THE
U.S. IN ALL THIS?
>> THIS IS FOR THE IRAQIS AND
FOR THE U.S., A SOURCE OF
INFORMATION, AND AT LEAST IN ONE
INSTANCE, WITNESSES SAID THAT
U.S. INTERROGATORS WOULD ENTER
THE INTERROGATION ROOM, AT LEAST
FOR THREE, FOUR HOURS A DAY,
FOUR TIMES A WEEK.
AND THEY ASK QUESTIONS THROUGH
THE OFFICERS TO GET
INFORMATION.
THIS KIND OF INFORMATION WILL
BE USED LATER IN THE RAIDS
AND AIRSTRIKES CARRIED OUT OVER
THE PAST MONTHS IN YEMEN.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IS THE
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT, THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE TO YOUR
STORY?
>> U.S. OFFICIALS ACKNOWLEDGED
THAT THEY HAD INTERROGATORS SENT
TO YEMENI PRISONS.
HOWEVER, THEY SAID THAT THEY
RECEIVED REPORTS OF TORTURE AND
THEY LOOKED INTO IT AND THEY
FOUND NOTHING.
AND THIS IS THE KIND OF RESPONSE
THAT THE FAMILIES WERE REALLY
UPSET TO HEAR, BECAUSE THEY WANT
HEAR THE U.S. GOVERNMENT SAYING
THEY'RE GOING TO LOOK INTO THIS,
GOING TO INVESTIGATE AND WE'RE
GOING TO FIGURE OUT WHAT'S
HAPPENING.
>> Sreenivasan: MAGGIE MICHAEL
OF THE ASSOCIATED PRESS JOINING
US VIA SKYPE FROM CAIRO TONIGHT,
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN PRESIDENT
DONALD TRUMP WITHDREW THE U.S.
FROM THE PARIS CLIMATE ACCORDS
THIS MONTH, HE EFFECTIVELY
REJECTED THE PRINCIPLE OF THE
WORLD'S WEALTHIER NATIONS
HELPING POOR ONES COPE WITH
CLIMATE CHANGE EFFECTS LIKE SEA
LEVEL RISE.
ONE SUCH PLACE IS THE PACIFIC
OCEAN REPUBLIC OF THE MARSHALL
ISLANDS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,"
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND" SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT MIKE TAIBBI
REPORTS HOW CLIMATE CHANGE IS
INCREASING THE STRUGGLE FOR
FRESH WATER THERE.
>> Reporter: TWO MEN MIX SAND
AND SHOVELFULS OF CEMENT,
SPENDING HOURS ON END BUILDING
THEIR SEAWALL-- NO, RE-BUILDING
IT, AND HIGHER EACH TIME.
BANGA RORIKI IS WORKING WITH HIS
NEPHEW, ROBIN, WHO HAS BEEN
LIVING IN THIS HOUSE, ON MAJURO,
ONE OF THE MARSHALL ISLANDS, FOR
22 YEARS.
>> THE HIGH TIDE COMES VERY HIGH
>> Reporter: HE SAYS THE WALL IS
MEANT TO STOP MASSIVE HIGH
TIDES, KNOWN HERE AS KING TIDES,
LIKE THE ONE THAT SURGED THROUGH
HIS HOME LAST YEAR.
ON ANOTHER OF THE MARSHALL
ISLANDS, EBEYE, THOSE SAME TIDES
EAT AWAY THE SHORELINE
EVERYWHERE YOU LOOK.
TOMBSTONES SHOVED FREE AND EVEN
SWEPT OUT TO SEA.
WHAT USED TO BE A PARK
SURROUNDING EBEYE'S POWER
PLANT-- GONE.
74-YEAR-OLD BELMA MAROK HAS
ALREADY SEEN KING TIDES DESTROY
SEVERAL HOMES HERE.
>> THE CORNER OF THE HOUSE WAS
RIGHT OVER THERE, RIGHT OUTSIDE
THAT PIECE OF CONCRETE THERE.
>> Reporter: THESE BIG SLABS
WERE PART OF THE FOUNDATION OF
THE HOUSE?
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: THE MARSHALL
ISLANDS, A NATION OF SLENDER
ATOLLS AND FIVE MORE SUBSTANTIAL
ISLANDS, SIT IN THE SOUTH
PACIFIC OCEAN BETWEEN HAWAII AND
AUSTRALIA, NO MORE THAN SIX OR
SEVEN FEET ABOVE SEA LEVEL.
CLIMATE SCIENTISTS WARN-- IF THE
CURRENT PACE OF GLOBAL WARMING
AND SEA LEVEL RISE CONTINUES,
THEN LOW-LYING ISLANDS LIKE THE
MARSHALLS COULD BECOME INCAPABLE
OF SUSTAINING THEIR POPULATION
WITHIN A GENERATION OR TWO.
>> SEA LEVEL IS RISING IN
CERTAIN PARTS OF THE PACIFIC
FASTER THAN ANYWHERE ELSE IN THE
WORLD.
>> Reporter: CHIP FLETCHER
STUDIES CLIMATE SCIENCE AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAII.
HE SAYS THAT WELL BEFORE THE
MARSHALL ISLANDS MIGHT DISAPPEAR
-- THEY COULD FACE A MORE
IMMEDIATE IMPACT FROM CLIMATE
CHANGE: FRESH WATER SHORTAGES.
WHAT'S THE BIGGEST THREAT NOW TO
THE MARSHALL ISLANDS?
>> DEPENDS ON YOUR TIME SCALE.
I THINK THE LONGER TIME SCALE
SEA LEVEL RISE IS PROBABLY THE
BIGGEST THREAT.
SIMPLY BECAUSE IT HAS THE
POTENTIAL TO RISE ABOVE THE
AVERAGE ELEVATION OF THE
MARSHALL ISLANDS.
SHORTER TIMESCALE THOUGH, IT'S
THE FUNDAMENTAL NEED FOR FRESH
WATER.
>> Reporter: ON EBEYE, FRESH
WATER IS BELMA MAROK'S BIGGEST
WORRY.
IN HIS HOME THE SPIGOTS HOOKED
UP TO THE TOWN WATER SYSTEM ARE
DRY.
HIS SON LUGS BUCKETS OF WATER SO
THEIR FAMILY CAN SHOWER AND
FLUSH THEIR TOILETS.
THE FAMILY RELIES ON RAINWATER
CATCHMENT TANKS FOR WATER, BUT
THOSE REMAIN PRACTICALLY EMPTY
BECAUSE OF A RELENTLESS DROUGHT.
>> WE BARELY HAVE ANY WATER.
PROBABLY THIS MUCH, BARELY HAVE
ENOUGH
>> Reporter: GETTING FRESH WATER
HAS ALWAYS BEEN A PREOCCUPATION
FOR THE MARSHALL ISLANDS.
MOST COMMUNITIES RELY ON
RAINWATER COLLECTION-- ROOFTOP
GUTTERS CONNECTED TO WATER TANKS
OUTSIDE OF VIRTUALLY EVERY HOME-
- AND A FEW UNDERGROUND
FRESHWATER AQUIFERS THEY CAN
ACCESS THROUGH WELLS.
THE FRESH WATER IS ESSENTIAL FOR
CLEANING, PERSONAL HYGIENE,
DOING LAUNDRY, AND OF COURSE,
DRINKING.
BUT AS LIFE IN THE ISLANDS
BECAME MORE WESTERNIZED, AND THE
POPULATION GREW TO MORE THAN 50-
THOUSAND PEOPLE, THOSE LIMITED
FRESHWATER SOURCES BECAME MORE
STRESSED THAN EVER.
AND NOW, BECAUSE OF CLIMATE
CHANGE, THE TRADITIONAL WATER
SOURCES ARE AT INCREASED RISK.
THE DROUGHTS ARE GETTING SO LONG
THAT COLLECTING ENOUGH RAINWATER
IS BECOMING HARDER AND HARDER.
THE FRESHWATER WELLS AND
UNDERGROUND AQUIFERS ARE AT RISK
OF BEING FOULED BY SALT WATER
FROM FREQUENT FLOODING.
SOME WELLS ALREADY SPOILED
BECAUSE OF HIGH TIDES DRIVEN BY
RISING SEA LEVEL.
THOSE SO-CALLED "KING" TIDES NOW
SWEEP OVER THE MARSHALLS MORE
INTENSELY AND MORE FREQUENTLY.
IT'S AN IRONY NOT LOST ON SOME
CLIMATE CHANGE EXPERTS THAT
WHILE THE MARSHALL ISLANDS ARE
AMONG THE SOVEREIGN NATIONS THAT
CONTRIBUTE THE LEAST TO GLOBAL
WARMING, THEY'RE ALSO AMONG THE
NATIONS THAT FACE THREATS THAT
ARE THE MOST PROFOUND AND
IMMEDIATE.
HILDA HEINE, THE PRESIDENT OF
THE REPUBLIC OF MARSHALL ISLANDS
IS KEENLY AWARE OF THE PARADOX
OF LIVING HERE.
IT'S THE OLD CLICHE-- WATER,
WATER EVERYWHERE AND NOT A DROP
TO DRINK.
>> WE'VE BEEN FIGHTING THIS
CLIMATE CHANGE FOR THE LAST,
WHAT, MAYBE FIVE TO TEN YEARS.
AND OUR ISLANDS ARE STILL
LIVABLE.
SO WE CONTINUE TO HAVE HOPES.
AND SO I THINK WE'RE ABLE TO
MAKE SURE THAT PEOPLE ARE SAFE
DURING DROUGHTS.
WE'RE ABLE TO PROVIDE WATER,
FOOD AND SO ON.
SO THAT'S WHAT WE NEED TO DO.
IT'S THE NEW NORM, BUT THAT
DOESN'T MEAN GIVING UP.
>> Reporter: PRESIDENT HEINE
SAYS THE GOVERNMENT HAS MADE
FRESH WATER ACCESS A PRIORITY,
AND POINTS TO IMPROVEMENTS IN
THE CENTRALIZED WATER SYSTEMS ON
THE TWO MOST CROWDED ISLANDS--
MAJURO AND EBEYE.
BUT THOSE SYSTEMS SUPPLY ONLY A
FRACTION OF THE POPULATION AND
FOR LIMITED HOURS EACH WEEK.
ON MAJURO, HOME TO 27,000
RESIDENTS, SEVERE WEATHER EVENTS
PUT ENORMOUS PRESSURE ON THE
MAIN WATER SOURCE-- SEVEN
RESERVOIRS THAT STORE RAINWATER
COLLECTED FROM THE AIRPORT'S
RUNWAY.
HALSTON DEBRUM IS OPERATIONS
MANAGER FOR MAJURO'S GOVERNMENT-
RUN WATER COMPANY.
HE SAYS THE DROUGHT LAST YEAR
NEARLY DEPLETED THEIR SUPPLY.
>> THIS RESERVOIR WAS HALF.
THAT ONE, EMPTY.
RESERVOIR NUMBER ONE AND TWO
WERE PRETTY EMPTY AS WELL.
THE ONLY WATER WE DID HAVE WAS
PRETTY MUCH IN THE COVERED
RESERVOIR, THE TREATED WATER.
>> Reporter: DEBRUM SAYS A MORE
SEVERE WEATHER EVENT COULD LEAVE
THEM SCRAMBLING.
SO IF THE BIG ONE HITS NEXT
MONTH, YOU GUYS AREN'T READY FOR
IT?
>> NO, IF THE BIG ONE HITS NEXT
MONTH, WE WON'T BE READY FOR IT.
AND THEN WE'LL HAVE TO FIND
OTHER WAYS TO PROVIDE WATER.
>> Reporter: BUT DEBRUM SAYS
HE'S CONFIDENT COMING
IMPROVEMENTS WILL ONE DAY
PROVIDE ALL RESIDENTS 24/7 WATER
ACCESS, EVEN DURING DROUGHTS.
>> I THINK IF WE IMPROVE WHAT WE
HAVE HERE WHAT WE HAVE.
THE INFRASTRUCTURE WORK THAT WE
HAVE NOW.
IMPROVE THE PIPELINE.
IMPROVE OUR CATCHMENT AREA ON
THE RUNWAY.
AND THEN BUILD MORE RESERVOIRS.
BIGGER RESERVOIRS SO THAT WE CAN
STORE MORE.
>> Reporter: ON EBEYE, THE MAIN
FRESHWATER SOURCE IS A 14-YEAR-
OLD DESALINATION THAT'S
UNDERGOING A NEARLY $5 MILLION
UPGRADE.
BUT RIGHT NOW IT'S LESS THAN A
PANACEA FOR THE MORE THAN TEN-
THOUSAND PEOPLE LIVING IN THIS
DENSELY POPULATED SETTING.
FOR ONE THING, THE WATER IS
PIPED INTO HOUSEHOLDS ONLY 45-
MINUTES A DAY, TWO DAYS A WEEK.
AND IT ISN'T SAFE TO DRINK
WITHOUT BOILING IT.
FOR MOST OF THEIR WATER NEEDS,
RESIDENTS COME TO THIS PUBLIC
TAP.
BUT EVEN THOUGH THIS WATER IS
TESTED ON A REGULAR BASIS, MANY
RESIDENTS ARE SKEPTICAL.
DO YOU USE IT TO DRINK, OR JUST
COOK WITH IT?
WHAT DO YOU DO WITH IT?"
>> I DO BOTH COOK AND EAT WITH
IT, AND ALSO BATH AND SHOWER.
>> Reporter: BUT DO YOU DRINK IT
STRAIGHT?
>> EH, NOT REALLY.
I DON'T DRINK THE WATER HERE, I
DRINK THE WATER FROM KWAJ.
>> Reporter: "KWAJ" IS THE U.S.
MILITARY BASE ON NEIGHBORING
KWAJALEIN ISLAND.
FERRIES THROUGHOUT THE DAY FROM
KWAJ BRING JUGS OF GOOD, FREE
AND SAFE WATER FROM THE BASE'S
OWN STATE OF THE ART
DESALINATION PLANT.
THESE FIVE GALLON JUGS FROM THE
FERRY WEIGH MORE THAN 40 POUNDS
APIECE AND THEY ARE A LOAD TO
CARRY.
HEALTH RISKS FROM CONTAMINATED
WATER ARE A CONSTANT WORRY IN
THE MARSHALL ISLANDS.
WATERBORNE ILLNESSES ARE ONE OF
THE TOP THREE CONDITIONS TREATED
AT EBEYE'S HOSPITAL.
WHEN WE JOURNEYED TO ONE OF THE
MORE REMOTE MARSHALL ISLANDS--
ARNO, HOME TO JUST 1,500 PEOPLE-
- WE SAW A HEALTH WORKER
EDUCATING CHILDREN AND ADULTS
ABOUT THE RISKS OF CONTAMINATED
WATER AND HOW TO CLEAN AND TEST
WATER TO MAKE SURE IT'S SAFE.
STILL, AFTER THE LECTURE WE MET
TARJADIK ARWAN, WHO WAS DRAWING
FRESH WATER FROM ONE OF THE FEW
WELLS STILL PRODUCING.
SHE SAYS CHILDREN IN THE VILLAGE
HAVE CONTRACTED PINK EYE,
DIARRHEA, AND TYPHOID FEVER FROM
THE WELLS.
A FEW MILES AWAY, A MAN NAMED
KONIO JOE RELIES ON THIS TANK TO
PROVIDE WATER FOR HIS FAMILY'S
HOME WHICH HE BUILT IT AFTER A
KING TIDE LAST YEAR SWEPT AWAY
HIS OLD HOUSE A FEW YARDS CLOSER
TO THE SHORE.
CLIMATE SCIENTIST CHIP FLETCHER
SAYS THERE ARE WAYS TO AT LEAST
DELAY THE IMPACT OF SEA LEVEL
RISE AND SALTWATER INTRUSION.
>> WHAT'S THE RULE OF THUMB?
IF YOU WAGE WAR WITH WATER, YOU
WILL LOSE.
YIELD AND ELEVATE.
YIELD TO THE WATER, AND ELEVATE.
>> Reporter: BY THAT FLETCHER
MEANS ACCEPTING THE CONSEQUENCES
OF SEAWATER RISE AND MOVING
HOMES INLAND AND TO HIGHER
GROUND.
THAT'S WHY FLETCHER AND HIS TEAM
ARE CREATING THREE-DIMENSIONAL
MODELS OF THE MARSHALLS, LIKE
THIS ONE OF HAWAII'S OAHU
ISLAND, TO SHOW WHERE FLOODING
IS MOST LIKELY TO OCCUR AS SEA
LEVEL RISES, AND WHAT COULD BE
DONE TO DEFEND AGAINST IT-- LIKE
BUILDING MORE ROBUST SEAWALLS
AROUND THE PERIMETER OF THE
ISLANDS.
FLETCHER SAYS THAT'S AN APPROACH
THAT SHOULD BE CONSIDERED BY THE
MARSHALL ISLANDS OR BY OTHER
LOW-LYING PACIFIC OCEAN
COUNTRIES, LIKE TUVALU, THE COOK
ISLANDS, AND THE CARTERET
ISLANDS OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA.
ALL OF WHICH ARE SEEING AN
EXODUS DRIVEN PARTLY BY CLIMATE
CHANGE.
>> THERE ARE COMMUNITIES THAT
ARE SORT OF POISED ON THE EDGE
OF THE CLIFF, I BELIEVE ALL IT
TAKES IS ONE EVENT, A KING TIDE
EVENT, AND THAT MIGHT BE THE
KILLER EVENT TO PUSH YOU OVER
THE EDGE.
>> Reporter: HOW CLOSE ARE YOU,
DO YOU THINK, TO THE KIND OF
DESTRUCTIVE WEATHER EVENT WHICH
WILL SIGNAL A PROFOUND CHANGE IN
THE WAY THAT YOU SHOULD OR THE
WORLD SHOULD LOOK AT CLIMATE
CHANGE?
>> WELL, WE'RE PRACTICAL, AND I
THINK WE'RE LOOKING AT THE
MITIGATION EFFORTS, ADAPTATION,
HOW WE CAN MAKE THE COUNTRY
RESILIENT, PEOPLE RESILIENT TO
THE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE.
AND WE CONTINUE TO DO THAT.
BECAUSE THE OPTION IS NOT AN
OPTION FOR US.
WE CANNOT THINK ABOUT EVACUATING
OUR COUNTRY, OUR ISLAND, BECAUSE
PEOPLE ARE CONNECTED TO THEIR
LAND.
IF WE'RE NOT ON THESE ISLANDS,
THEN WE'RE ANOTHER PEOPLE,
ANOTHER COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: THE PRESIDENT DOES
FRET ABOUT THE SEAWALL STANDING
BETWEEN HER OWN HOME AND THE
WATER THAT RISES HIGHER EACH
YEAR-- A BARRIER THAT SHE SAYS,
ERODES WITH EVERY KING TIDE.
IN THE MEANTIME, THE PRESIDENT'S
ACROSS-THE-STREET NEIGHBOR ON
MAJURO, BANGA RORIKI, KEEPS
BUILDING AND RE-BUILDING HIS
SEAWALL, HOPING HIS HOME CAN
SURVIVE.
>> Sreenivasan: AN OIL TANKER
TRUCK OVERTURNED ON A HIGHWAY IN
EASTERN PAKISTAN TODAY, THEN
EXPLODED-- KILLING MORE THAN 150
PEOPLE.
MANY OF THE VICTIMS HAD RUSHED
FROM A NEARBY VILLAGE TO THE
ACCIDENT SITE TO FILL CONTAINERS
WITH LEAKING OIL FROM THE TANKER
WHEN IT SUDDENLY IGNITED.
POLICE BELIEVE A SPARK FROM ONE
OF THE VEHICLES THAT RACED TO
THE SCENE OR FROM SOMEONE WHO
TRIED TO LIGHT A CIGARETTE MAY
BE TO BLAME.
MORE THAN 100 PEOPLE WERE
TREATED FOR BURNS.
IN SOUTHWESTERN CHINA, AT LEAST
93 PEOPLE ARE STILL MISSING
AFTER YESTERDAY'S MOUNTAINSIDE
COLLAPSE TRIGGERED BY HEAVY
RAINFALL.
OFFICIALS ESTIMATE THE LANDSLIDE
POURED THE EQUIVALENT OF SEVEN-
THOUSAND OLYMPIC-SIZED SWIMMING
POOLS WORTH OF EARTH AND ROCK
ONTO THE VILLAGE IN SICHUAN
PROVINCE.
TODAY, 2,500 RESCUERS SEARCHED
FOR SURVIVORS WITH DOGS AND
DETECTION DEVICES.
THREE PEOPLE WERE PULLED ALIVE
FROM THE RUBBLE-- A COUPLE AND
THEIR TWO-MONTH-OLD BABY.
RESCUERS HAVE ALSO RECOVERED THE
BODIES OF TEN VICTIMS.
SICHUAN PROVINCE IS PRONE TO
TREMORS AND EARTHQUAKES.
A MAJOR QUAKE IN 2008 KILLED 70-
THOUSAND PEOPLE.
AS PROMISED, TURKISH AUTHORITIES
THWARTED AN ANNUAL GAY PRIDE
MARCH TODAY.
POLICE IN ISTANBUL FIRED TEAR
GAS AND RUBBER BULLETS TO
DISPERSE ACTIVISTS WHO DEFIED A
BAN ON THE ANNUAL MARCH FOR THE
THIRD YEAR IN A ROW.
BUT LARGE CROWDS LINED
MANHATTAN'S FIFTH AVENUE FOR NEW
YORK CITY'S 48TH ANNUAL PRIDE
MARCH.
THE ROUTE WOUND UP IN GREENWICH
VILLAGE NEAR THE STONEWALL INN,
CONSIDERED THE BIRTHPLACE OF THE
L.G.B.T. MOVEMENT.
LEADING THE PARADE WAS GRAND
MARSHAL BROOKE GUINAN, THE
CITY'S FIRST OPENLY TRANSGENDER
FIREFIGHTER.
SAN FRANCISCO AND CHICAGO ALSO
HELD THEIR ANNUAL PRIDE PARADES.
JUNE IS PRIDE MONTH.
THE REPUBLICAN HEALTH CARE BILL
FALLS SHORT OF FUNDING REQUESTS
FROM TWO GOP SENATORS TO FIGHT
THE NATION'S GROWING OPIOID
CRISIS.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: TOMORROW ON "THE
NEWSHOUR," JUDY WOODRUFF SITS
DOWN WITH INVESTOR AND
PHILANTHROPIST WARREN BUFFETT.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.